right well hi everybody this is a talk
entitled a second time around Barnard
star I did a once suround Barnard star
before but things have changed um one of
the things I like about astronomy is
that it is a dynamic science that we are
learning more all the time and so I
thought it was time that we had a bit of
an update on this one so let's go well
just for a recap Barnard star lives in a
constellation called ucus which is the
13th constellation of the zodiac through
which the planets pass that's kind of by
the by but it's a little faint star just
as shown on the diagram there below
Hercules in the outer reaches of this
rather obscure constellation of
fucus it's named Barnard star after this
guy Edward Emerson Barnard an American
astronomer who
actually has been responsible for a
terrific number of interesting objects
being found uh all over the sky lots of
nebuli but in particular this star Bears
his
name so what's special about it well
actually not very much in some ways it's
a red dwarf star and red dwarf stars
make up something like 70% of All Stars
so this is pretty
typical red dwarf stars class classified
Class M and this is an M4 so it's in the
middle of the N to9 range that you have
for an mclass star so again fairly
middle of the road sort of Red Dwarf
temperature
3,200 that classic red color because of
the low temperature the sun being much
hotter at
5,800 16% of the mass the smallest Red
Dwarf you can possibly have is around
about 7 and 1 half to 8% of the mass so
this is a little larger than the
smallest end of things but such small
Stars running at lower temperatures
produce a heck of a lot less by way of
output and this one is
125,000 of the total power output of the
Sun so no wonder it's really quite hard
to
see it spins on its axis in about 142
days Plus
minus and there are a lot of Stellar
flares on it the artist's impression on
the right is trying to show some of
those but it seems to have gone into a
quiet phase as regards flares and
sunspots since about 2005 possibly
rather like the sun did in the M de
minimum and the little ice age that we
had on earth when we had frost faes on
the river temps and all sorts of other
effects across the
world now as say it is quite a small
star these red dwarf stars are barely
larger than a gas giant there's Jupiter
and Barnard star to scale so it's maybe
nearly double the radius well that would
give it eight times the volume if it was
uh you do the maths because of the cube
LW to get volume so there's a certain
amount of mass there but it's still very
much smaller than uh the
Sun and I said there are 76% of all
stars are dwarfs that's what this
diagram is trying to show and if you
actually add in the sort of uh lower
Mass k type stars then you really get up
to the vast majority being these dwarf
stars smaller than the Sun and really
the stars that are larger than the sun
are just in that top three and a half%
um the the F A and B and O class Stars
so it's just absolutely one of the most
typical
now if you plot things on the good old
Herz sprung Russell diagram showing
Luminosity against temperature then you
can see Barnard star is marked down
there down to the bottom right and it's
not quite at the bottom of the list
there are some that are
smaller but it's a very ancient star
indeed we think it Formed about 10
billion years ago twice as long ago as
the sun
and almost all the way back to the Big
Bang itself the universe being
13.75 billion years old or so um 10
billion years means this is a Survivor
from relatively early times must have
been one of the first stars to form in
the Milky Way galaxy in the grand scheme
of things and as such it's quite low in
heavy elements the carbon oxygen iron
all those sorts of elements that are
cooked up in the center of giant Stars
didn't really have very many gen
Generations before Barnard star formed
out of the available material and so it
didn't pick up the signature of previous
generations of large Stars having
polluted the universe with their met
so-called Metals astronomers call
anything heavier than helium a metal
much to the annoyance of uh chemists who
realize that they're rather abusing the
term so it's 10 billion years old what
going to happen to it in the future well
red dwarf stars it turns out are running
on economy and they have a trick up
their sleeve so they run very cool and
burn quite slowly but because they are
able to conve all of the core where this
material is undergoing nuclear fusion
and mix it by convection with all of the
material in the envelope they're
actually able to access all the hydrogen
that they contain so
they can make use of all the fuel
whereas a much larger star like the sun
really can't do that and so only a
proportion gets used before the uh
Fusion process switches off in larger
stars but red dwarfs are able to access
their entire Mass so even though the
mass is lower it lasts them a lot longer
and of course they're burning more
slowly as well at lower temperatures and
so actually we think that a red dwarf
star like this would
eventually die and form a little helium
white dwarf puff off some of its outer
layers maybe but none have done so and
it's likely that a star like Barnard
star might live for 500 billion years
way longer than the uh current age of
the universe and so no red dwarf star
that has ever formed in our universe has
even remotely begun to start aging and
heading towards its eventual
burnout so why is Barnard star
interesting then if it's absolutely
typical of these long lived small red
dwarf stars that have been around for
ages well it's near to us the
measurement back in the early part of
the 20th century showed that it was just
six light years away they measure The
Parallax by looking at the change in
position compared to the much more
distant background stars of a nearby
star and you can see over the course of
a year as you orbit around the sun you
change position from one side of the Sun
to the other so have a baseline of two
times the Earth's orbital radius so that
makes 300 million kilometer Baseline
that's a nice long Baseline and you can
see the position of a star changing
against the background measuring the
angle that it changes very carefully you
can work out from your knowledge of
trigonometry just how far away the star
is likely to be and six light years put
it second in the table of distances
second only to Alpha
centuri just to give you an idea of how
far six light years is one lightyear is
the distance traveled by light in a year
which works out at about 10 trillion
kilm or 6 trillion miles so if you were
to drive around in your car and you did
30,000 mil a
year um and there happened to be an
Interstellar Highway that went all the
way to Barnard star it would take you
200 million years to get there uh of
course that's going to be a problem if
your car ran out of uh mechanical engine
life are to say 1 million miles you'd
need to replace the engine 6 million
times or something ridiculous like that
to get there um the the fastest
spacecraft ever launched would still
take nearly 200,000 years to cross that
distance it's a long way here's a
diagram which just shows the sun in the
center and the real limit of the sun's
influence the Earth Cloud out there the
final part of our solar system where the
leftover Building Material ice and dust
forming the Earth CL where a lot of
comets probably come from is about one
light ear from the earth one one light
ear from the Sun um we go out two light
years four light years and then we find
Alpha centuri which is a triple star
system there's the A and B Stars which
are fairly similar to the Sun and
another of these red dwarfs called
Proxima centuri and then at six light
years we would come across in a
different direction Barnard star and the
other objects that are listed there with
their wise catalog numbers those are
actually brown dwarf stars failed stars
that we've detected that are the next
nearest objects after Barnard
star now if you were at barard Star and
you looked back what would the sky look
like well the sun would appear in the
region of the constellation of monoceros
the Unicorn a fairly faint and obscure
constellation but we would be located
within a triangle of bright Stone Stars
we would have bers from Orion prion from
canis minor and Sirius from Canis Major
framing the position of the sun but the
sun would be relatively faint at that
position now Bard star is also moving
and it's coming closer to
us the we've mapped the movement of
quite a few of the nearby stars and it's
shown on this diagram in terms of time
from now and a little bit into the past
and the distance and at the moment
Proxima centuri and the alpha centuri
system is the closest at just four light
years and then you can see the path of
Barnard star at Six coming quite quickly
towards us and it crosses that four
Lightyear boundary comes down to about
3.75 but it never quite gets closer than
Proxima because after that Barnard star
will Loop away from us as it orbits
round on its trajectory around the
Galaxy and Proxima will still be a
little bit closer because it too is
approaching us and we'll continue to do
so for about 25 to 27,000 years when it
too starts to recede um and you can see
some of the other stars on there as they
approach us and move further away as we
all orbit around the Galaxy
together now all that movement results
in the most interesting feature that
Barnard saw and the reason that this
star Bears his name in 1916 he detected
the fact that Barnard star was hurtling
across the sky not only do we get a
parallax by looking at it over a
six-month period but the star itself is
moving relative to the background
because of its rapid motion relative to
us and being so close to us U 10.3 arccs
per year is quite a substantial shift
and in fact you'd be able to tell that
with an amateur telescope just by doing
some observations on the same uh date or
thereabouts each year you'd be able to
plot its position against the background
Stars so this was actually faster than
any of the other stars it became the
record holder hence it was worth naming
and
uh that's uh still the case today we've
never found a nearer faster moving one
well all this interest in Barnard star
and the fact that it was close to us led
to us studying it to see whether there
were any planets and so we move on now
to not looking at the star itself but
the possibility that there are planets
orbiting around Barnard
star now with it being so old and
therefore not having very many of the
heavy elements it does mean that it
probably was a bit short of the rocky
metal materials to make up a planetary
system we think that as the universe
gets
dirtier the most recent generations of
stars are going to have more planet
forming material available to them and
so going back 10 billion years it's
there is a question mark over whether
there would have been any planets there
at all uh you might have had enough to
form some Pure Gas planets but trying to
form a rocky core could have been
difficult so Peter vaner Camp astronomer
from
Holland tracked Barnard star across the
sky and he tried to use a technique
called astrometry where you measure the
position of the star and see if the star
is wobbling back and
forth synchronized to the orbital period
of an unseen companion planet
and Peter announced that he had made a
discovery in fact he made a couple of
announcements of more than one planet uh
the first one was of a super Jupiter
planet one and a half times the mass of
Jupiter orbiting at about
4.4 astronomical units an astronomical
unit being the Earth Sun distance uh he
also suggested there were two planets uh
one slightly larger than Jupiter and one
slightly smaller than Jupiter so I made
a number of these pred itions and it was
all based on looking at the data for the
position on the sky and so these data
here is his uh position information
about the right Ascension that's the the
longitude on the sky and the declination
the latitude on the sky of Barnard star
and we've drawn a wiggly line through it
to indicate a sort of wobbling backwards
and forwards in a sine wave and it
appears to do so about every 10 years um
hence some of the numbers that Peter was
was able to come up with but nobody else
could ever reproduce this this is one of
those scientific arguments that went on
for decades about what who was right now
Peter sadly passed away and he never
really saw the final resolution of all
of this so I think he went uh to his
grave in the belief that he was right
but we now know that what really
happened was was that we had a straight
line with some experimental error there
another one here and a third one here
and these are at 10-year intervals
because the telescope was subject to
maintenance at this point and guess what
maintenance happens every 10 years so
they took his telescope apart again so
1962 and
1972 the telescope was slightly
differently aligned when it went back to
together leading to this jolt in the
position so the appearance of a sine
wave is actually an artifact of the
maintenance of the telescope this was
the eventual resolution of it so sadly
none of Peter's predictions of planets
came
true and that was the state until
November of 2018 when this piece of news
hit the
headlines an extract from the BBC
website and it show
the announcement of Barnard b a planet
of 3.2 times the Earth's mass found to
be orbiting round the star Barnard star
so one of our near neighbors suddenly
announced to have a planet now this is a
little bit of a surprise because it is
actually a super Earth three and a bit
times the mass of our sun that's quite a
big planet in some ways it was orbiting
around the
star every 233 days and that's an
orbital period roughly the same as that
of Venus going around our sun but it was
rather closer in because this is a
lighter weight star that it's orbiting
so it would have been around about the
orbital distance of
mercury but
nevertheless barard star only puts out
25,000th of the heat so this Planet
would have been a rather chilly minus
150 C there's a sort of diagram of its
size and relative position um schematic
orbital distance 04 of an astronomical
unit orbital period 233 days rather
larger than the earth against that much
smaller star
so calculating how much heat it would
release this would have put it near the
frost line where water would start to
snow out and in fact other materials
like ammonia and methane would condense
down as well so it would be outside the
habitable zone where water would exist
as a liquid it be jolly cold but perhaps
able to accrete quite a lot of the
volatile materials at this distance and
so perhaps finding that it was a
reasonably large planet sounds possible
bearing in mind what I said about barard
star being a bit short of rock and metal
because they have the poity of heavy
metals so various people produced some
rather Nic looking uh artists impression
here of what it might look like on
Barnard B with the red dwarf giving that
red Hue to the the landscape all those
uh mountains and so forth would have
been made of uh Frozen up water and
methane and carbon monoxide and things
like that snowing out on onto the
surface but with much stronger gravity
it should be able to hang on to quite a
substantial
atmosphere at 3.2 times the mass with a
sort of typical density that we might
expect for a low density world with not
much metal but a reasonable amount of
ice this would be about one and a half
times the radius of the Earth um but you
got to bear in mind this detection was
made not by the transit method of seeing
a the disc of a planet pass in front of
the star
but by the radial velocity method so
it's detecting the Doppler shift wobble
of the Barnard star
itself and when you do that you are
really measuring the minimum Mass
because you're assuming in some ways
that the maximum displacement is
occurring which would occur if the
planet was orbiting across your line of
sight whereas if it was tilted then the
mass estimate could be an under estimate
that's why it says at least 3.2 times
the mass of Earth here so very cold
indeed but uh the atmosphere probably
bring it up a little bit from a base
temperature um ofus 170 up to more like
10-50 still pretty chilly there's
another artist's impression slightly
more fanciful here uh of some sort of uh
Alien vegetation on there and uh the
star glowing really quite bright bright
brighter than the full moon but nowhere
near as bright as the Sun so uh probably
very fanciful
indeed but another Factor would be that
these large super Earth bodies have a
greater volume compared to their surface
area so the larger something is the
volume grows the cube of the radius the
surface area only grows as the square of
the radius and so you get more volume
compared to the area why does that
matter well you dissipate heat through
the surface through the area of the
object but the heat trapped inside is
based on the bulk it's based on the
volume and so larger bodies will have
more heat trapped inside them trying to
get out through a relatively lower
surface so it's quite likely that the
buildup of immense amounts of volcanoes
could be one possibility for a rocky
world of this size uh other
possibilities are though that this is
not so much of a rocky planet with a
metal core uh again because the star
doesn't have very many of those but it's
more of a ice World perhaps with a small
rocky core with a lot of heat trapped
inside it and a liquid ocean underneath
rather like we find at the uh PL moons
of Jupiter such as Europa
so at the smaller end of things quite
likely to be like that with perhaps a
large amount of liquid water maybe quite
a lot of ammonia and methane um other
ices perhaps a super Earth we would
describe that as but if the mass was
even larger the stronger gravity would
have attracted a lot of the volatile
hydrogen and helium into a thick
atmospheric envelope and so we might be
looking more at a mini Neptune and so
that was the state of things when I
published my previous video on Barnard
star but in 2024 it all changed it's
just not true sorry about that I've been
uh exaggerating and lying to you about
Barnard B A careful look with more
modern technology at the supposed signal
from the rotation of the planet
uh sorry from the the the Doppler shift
of the star caused by the rotation of
the planet around it turns out to be in
fact caused by the Spin of the star
itself this 233 day supposed orbit of
bonard B is in fact a an integer ratio
multiplied by the Spin of the star
itself and so the change in the Doppler
shift was really being caused as an
artifact of taking the star Spectrum U
and the star spinning on its own axis so
all of that lovely speculation about
Barnard B I'm afraid went out of the
window but in the process of analyzing
the data much more closely it's been
replaced by four new planetary
candidates b c d and e but this B is not
the same as the previous B and none of
them are the same as Peter vaner Camp's
planets gets a bit confusing doesn't it
but here we have b c d and e and they're
labeled B for the first one C for the
second one D and then e in the order of
Discovery not the order of distance
because if we found another planet
interior then we would have to relabel
them all again and that would get really
confusing and so the the order from the
planet goes d b c
e only B has actually been confirmed the
others are still
hypothesized and if we look at them
they're all actually small subar planets
so these are probably relatively modest
planets like Mars or like Mercury
perhaps even as small as our moon in
some cases and the percentage size there
that you have compared to the size of
the planet Earth is in the documentation
there on the screen in that table with
their distances all quite small
fractions of an astronomical unit and
their orbits going
around and again these were all detected
by this radial velocity method looking
at the blue and red shift of the light
from the Star depending on where it's
going towards us or away from us now
again we just to go back to this point
these Mass estimates are actually the
minimum mass of the planet not the max
maximum Mass this is assuming that the
orbit is causing the maximum Doppler
shift from our point of view which would
mean they would need to be aligned with
us in a flat plane if there's a big tilt
it can make a huge difference
so a recent news on this is that the
Tess spacecraft the terrestrial planet
Searcher has gone up and looked at
Bernard Star and found no Transit event
so we know one thing which is that the
system is not Edge on to us so the
planets are definitely bigger than the
minimum estimates what we don't know is
how much bigger if they were tipped by
60 they could be double the mass and if
they were tipped by getting on for 90
Dees it could be a very large error
indeed so they are bigger than those
minimum Mass estimates but still
probably Earth or subar size is the the
uh consensus on that one so again this
is something that we need to follow up
on now I did just want to say a couple
of things about
the um heat output of Barnard B it's
worth looking at this these low mass red
dwarf stars have a power spectrum that
puts most of the light out in the
infrared part of the spectrum almost not
warm enough to put out very much visible
light at all uh and the strongest color
is of course red and then it dips very
rapidly but most of it and the peak
indeed is in the infrared part of the
spectrum and that means that there is
quite a lot of heat coming off even
though they're not very bright um but it
does mean that the goldilock Zone the
habitable zone is very close in so it's
possible that these close in planets
might be at a temperature that could be
of interest
to having water on the surface and
possibly even life but there's a
downside to being so close to the star
and that is that it becomes very likely
that the gravity of the star affects the
rotation of the planet on its axis and
brings it into what's called tidal lock
whereby one face of the planet points
towards the star at all times so one
year for the planet equals one day for
the planet very much as the moon keeps
one face to us because it rotates on its
axis in the same time period that it
takes to go round the earth once so it
just keeps turning and turning as it
goes round keeping one face staring
towards the Earth that tidal lock is
caused by gravity it's caused by the
fact that the planet is pulling back on
the star and trying to raise tides on
the surface of the star or in the case
of the Moon the tides of the oceans and
that acts as a friction break which
pulls the planet into alignment and
forces this tidal lock situation now if
that happens you will get one side of
your planet very very hot and one side
very very cold but it could mean that
there are temperate zones along the day
night boundary where the sunlight is
coming in obliquely it might make the
weather pretty weird but uh it's uh
definitely going to create a range of
temperatures on these planets so it's
definitely a place that we need to study
more closely and we're going to do that
because the James web Space Telescope
has studying Barnard B and its uh uh
possible companions as one of the things
that is on its list of things to go and
image and attempt to measure much more
about them directly
now Barnard star is also featured
because the British interplanetary
Society had the idea of it being a
really good Target for an Interstellar
Mission and that was called datus Icarus
so it's a two-stage rocket but a nuclear
rocket using nuclear fusion that would
accelerate to 12% of the speed of light
and try and get to Barnard star in 50
years now this was proposed back in the
AP
days before Apollo had even got to the
moon and there's an Apollo Saturn 5
stood next to De
lasarus just for comparison of the size
there in terms of the artist's
impression the two stages of
the interstellar probe would have been
powered by a Fusion engine now no one's
built a Fusion engine yet but it ought
to be possible we ought to be able to
inject hydrogen cause nuclear fusion
generate heat and have the uh resulting
exhaust accelerate us to very very high
speeds indeed much more efficient than
an atomic engine using uranium as the
uranium is very heavy and certainly way
better than any chemical rocket could
ever achieve so it's possible that such
a thing could accelerate a probe up to
the speed of light this would have been
two stages daus for the base Icarus for
the top and uh it would been so large
that it would have had to have been
constructed in orbit so maybe one day we
will get round to building something a
bit like this and be able to fly a probe
even if we don't fly humans off on a
50-year trip to Barnard star and get up
close and personal and have a really
good look at all of those planets that
there are um in that solar system just
six light years away so thanks very much
for listening to that and I hope you've
enjoyed the
update bye for now